# Census tract income forcast
### Canadian Census Tracts (CTs) clustering analysis and income level forecasting
### Executive summary
The goal of the study was to use the training dataset to find the group of demographic traits that can most accurately predict the median household income (in dollars per year) for census tracts and make predictions about the annual median household income for each census tract in the test dataset. It was achieved in several steps, started by an exploratory data analysis on the variables, including removing error rows and highly correlated variables. Then, we grouped the census data into 3 different clusters using unsupervised learning algorithms, since areas with vastly varying levels of development may have different prediction models. The Elbow method, the Silhouette method, and Pseudo-F Method were applied to find the best K. Then we applied supervised learning and compared 4 types of models – K-Nearest Neighbor, Linear Regression, CART, and Neural Network to find the best method for median household income prediction in each of the 3 clusters. To further improve the model performance, we found the corresponding best subset based on the models we selected and achieved the highest R square possible. The predictive model can be applied in diverse fields such as advertisement, government, and research organizations for multiple purposes.
### Introduction
The raw data we retrieved concern Census tracts (CTs), which are modest, geographically stable areas with a typical population of 2,500–8,000 persons. CTs are typically found in census agglomerations (CA) and census metropolitan areas (CMA) with a core population of 50,000 or more, as determined by local experts and Statistics Canada. After a CMA or CA has been partitioned into CTs, the CTs are kept even if the core population eventually falls below 50,000. Our goal was to find the group of demographic traits that can most accurately predict the median household income (in dollars per year) for CTs and use them to make predictions about future annual median household income for each census tract.
There are two available datasets for this analysis, the first contains 5,000 CT records and will be used to train the model and the second data set contains 721 rows and will be used to evaluate the accuracy of the predictions. To ensure the prediction accuracy, we start by grouping the census data into different clusters using unsupervised learning algorithms, since areas with vastly varying levels of development may have different prediction models. Then we apply supervised learning and compare models to find the best method for median household income prediction. The details of the method will be explained in the following sections along with visualizations. Findings, summary of the study, and potential applications of the predictive model will be given at the end of this report.
### Exploratory Data Analysis
In the training dataset, each row represents 1 CT record, which includes 14 demographic characteristics as input variables and the median household income as the output variable. The test dataset has the same 14 attributes and is missing the output. All variables are numeric, and no additional columns are created in either dataset. Based on the data feature, the 14 inputs are categorized into 4 data groups: Basics, Occupied Private Dwellings by Period of Construction, Occupied Private Dwellings by Structure Type, and Occupied Private Dwellings by Tenure. For each of the last 3 groups, there is one variable indicating the sum of all the other variables inside the same group.
During the data cleaning process, 20 rows where total household or total population are 0 are dropped since they do not provide useful information for prediction. We also carried out a correlation analysis (Figure 1) and a multivariate analysis (Figure 2), where we noticed that the correlation coefficient of most of the variable pairs is less than 0.5. However, Total Population is found to be highly correlated with multiple variables, such as Total Households, Total Households for Period of Construction, Total Households for Tenure, and Dwellings by Tenure Owner. Besides, Total Households and Total Households for Period of Construction are identical. Therefore, Total Population and Total Households for Period of Construction are not selected for modelling (Table 1). 
